# Automating semantic data integration tasks for life sciences researchers

Web service and agent automation has been a major software engineering challenge over the last decade. Recently, common service interoperability strategies, such as mashups and workflows, are giving place to the concept of Integration-as-a-Service (IaaS). IaaS strategies are used to perform a lightweight control of a clearly defined set of cloud-based services. In summary, these allow the coordination of multiple services without a custom ad-hoc controller. This results in automated data exchanges, where data flows between interoperable services happen in the cloud environment, triggered by specific events.
In this context,**i2x** is a framework for creating new IaaS environments, without interfering with the used services' implementation. **i2x** revolves around four key integration features: content monitoring, semantic abstraction, rule processing and the final data delivery. **i2x** monitors defined data sources to monitor for specific content changes. For instance, a server log monitor could detect when a new error was logged and a SPARQL endpoint monitor could detect when specific query results change. These contextual content changes are events. When new events are detected, they kick off the integration process, which can be configured to perform any number and kind of operations, from sending emails to inserting rows in a database table. The process starts with a semantic abstraction, translating the original resource content into a graph based model. This transformation is configurable, and enables the generation of complex data relationships. Once the semantic abstraction is complete, **i2x** validates the integration workflow through a rule processing engine. Rules can be applied before integration, to validate or transform data, or after integration, to start new actions afterwards. Rules can be simple regular expressions or more complex data transformations.

A basic Worker will send an email with the respective Event data whereas a more complex Worker will access a given service with parameters extracted from the Event metadata.
With Labour.IO's flexibility and dynamics, developers can create custom Agent-Event-Worker pipelines to tackle miscellaneous integration and interoperability challenges in an automated fashion. Life sciences scenarios can benefit from this approach for automating data processing tasks or result sharing workflows. Likewise, CRM or B2B environments can be improved with the creation of dedicated Labour.IO instances, enabling the automation of a broad number of tasks, ranging from invoice processing to customer contact.